# GIDSOpenStandaarden-Privacy 	 	

## Introduction

In GIDS Open Standarden, substantive choices about privacy go hand in hand with practical implementation. GIDS Open Standarden aims to make people healthier by giving them as much control as possible and by organising care more flexibly and multidecisionally. Privacy in GIDS is therefore not only about preventing 'data-ripping' but also about giving users choice, real choice and understandable choice. Giving users the choice, as it were, of whether and how to step into the spotlight of a stage.

In designing GIDS, we therefore also started to look with users at how they actually make choices about sharing data. This showed that the most important thing in such choices is with whom you share data and how you deal with that person. So you can never make choices about sharing data if you know with whom and for what purpose. And the choices change, how you deal with people changes, sometimes you show more of yourself and sometimes less. Choices must therefore be made when the data is actually used and choices must always be open to revision.

Technically, this means only making visible what people have actually chosen to show. In many places, for example, your e-mail address is used to log in. But those e-mail addresses can be linked to each other and then, as a user, you no longer have the choice of what you share with whom. We therefore ensure that an organisation can know nothing more about you than what is necessary and what you have chosen to do. Giving choice also means clearly marking when another party is involved and marking when the way of dealing changes: those are the moments when you can make sensible choices. An example of this is marking transitions and asking permission in HTI: the moment you actually jump to another party, this is made clear and you are offered choices.
(Dutch version of this introduction: [Privacy Intro](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1NJWQ9-MeeTTUX_qwrRm0GOWaGYmwxpKE5kzmZBOLYPQ/edit?usp=sharing) )

## Signpost
Much of the work on privacy is done in Dutch, you can find an elaborate signpost in Dutch here: [WEGWIJZER Privacy
GIDS Open Standaarden](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1urIQJ8yGtPvhTyjWd6l-7Bazu42BRvbGFHNiImcPqPM/edit?usp=sharing). This signpost gives a selection of some relevant documents in English. Also note that many other parts of the project, like the Design parts and the HTI standards implemnt this view on privacy.

The paper [Opt-in, opt-out and bail-out](https://drive.google.com/open?id=18HfAjZsjKb-NJQuZU5vj99BYGWxrJBIW) has been the startingpoint of many of the ideas on privacy of GIDS Open Standaarden. It stretches from a theoretical view on privacy to practical ideas for asking permission. A later paper describes a part of the design process: The use of a game to create awareness, to enter into dialogue with users and to be able to test design choices. The process of using this game is described in: [Gaming as an agile tool for privacy by design in e-health](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1lPT1n7DwX7ipyxWMICsqnKdcsww5Fxk3) The latest version of the game, both in Dutch and English, as well as various manuals, are in the folder: [Privacy game](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1pBVrrvQ9LemrWQhU26FWHJ8EwD3oqk3m). The privacy game has confirmed that, as stated in the 'opt-in, opt-out and bail-out' paper, people do indeed think in terms of relationships and not in terms of data. This has, among other things, led to the fact that the most important part in permission questions within GIDS is **who** you share data with for what **purpose** and not what data.
